Let us move on to our final module.
This one isn't going to be so much of
a project as just a quick whirlwind
tour of how we can use this Plot library
in different places around the Web.
So we've been looking at how we
can use it in Observable so far.
But we can also use plot,
it's just a JavaScript library module,
we can also use it in other projects
that have nothing to do with Observable.
And we've seen all the syntax so that we
will need to create some basic plots here.
So, we can take those and share them
with the world, either on Observable or
in our own projects, whether vanilla or
with a framework like React.
So let us jump into this last item in
our data visualization collection here.
If folks have any trouble finding it,
I'll drop the link into the chart,
maybe if I can find it.
Here we go [LAUGH] okay.
All righty, so that is right there.
Okay, so, once you've got
your amazing visualizations,
whether they are aggregations or
facets small multiples,
or interactive, or static,
or whatever they are.
Visualizations are only as good as
the people whose eyes they are in front
of, right?
So, usually, unless you're just
exploring your own data for
yourself which is a super valid
use case of data visualization.
In fact that's exactly
what Plot was built for,
was this kind of exploratory data
analysis where you're trying to get
a better sense of what is happening in
a particular data set, maybe get some
idea of what those patterns are to
answer your questions as we said before.
And once you've got those
questions answered,
if you're trying to share those answers
with others, whether it be other people
like that you work with let's say,
or the world at large or
other users because you're baking
this into the apps you're building.
You're going to want to share your plots
with more people than just us probably.
So, let's take a look at a few
different options you have for
sharing any plots that you
have made in Observable,
because Observable exposes a few
different ways that you can take
your work that you've built in
a notebook and share it with the world.
So there are a few different options here.
And there are links in this notebook
that you can read more about how these
different options work.
So, first of all with Observable
notebooks, as you are seeing,
there is a notion of publicly
available notebook or
a shared notebook that more
than one person can see.
There's also a notion of a private
notebook that only I can see which
is really useful for
that initial exploration.
But in order to share all of these
materials with you, I had published, so
you'll see a little published at
the top of each of these notebooks.
I have published these notebooks to make
them accessible to the world at large.
And so if you have signed up for
an Observable account, and
again not necessary, but if you have, and
you're tinkering around in Observable and
you want to share a notebook that you've
made, at the top you'll see some options.
You'll see a sharing option or
if you don't see it,
you'll see in the three dots menu here, an
option to publish or an option to share.
The difference is essentially share it
lets you share a notebook with up to,
I think for other individual users.
So kind of like a private
collaborative space.
And then publish lets you share
the notebook more widely,
like I've done by making these notebooks
public so that everyone can see them.
You can go into Publish and
in this case I've already published it, so
we'll see Publish settings.
You can choose to make notebooks public,
meaning they are discoverable,
they'll show up on your user profile.
Again, if you have an account,
or you can make them enlisted.
So similar to an unlisted YouTube video or
a link shared document on Google Docs or
something like that.
This is the option for you,
if you don't really want everybody to know
about this notebook, but you wanna be able
to slack the link to your teammates who
don't have Observable accounts, let's say.
So there are a few
different options there.
You can set URLs, etc, etc.
So that is one option or
two options I guess you have,
you can share your notebook with specific
users using that share menu item here,
where you can type in individual
users to share this with.
So I don't know maybe I wanna
send it to my colleague,
my former colleague,
Mike Freeman, let's say.
I can add individual users there or
you can publish your notebook, either for
the whole world or just for
people with the link.
But perhaps more exciting,
is you can also embed cells from public or
link shared notebooks in
other places on the Web.
So, for example,
what we're looking at here,
this little widget here is
actually an iframe displaying
a live embed of the interactive
exercise from the previous project.
So I can interact with this
just as I could before.
This is really the same content as what
was in our notebook that we were just
looking at.
And Observable will generate a little
snippet, little HTML snippet or
JavaScript or source code for
other things like React that you can copy
from this little Export menu item,
again, three dots.
Export there is an Embed Cells
option where you can select
either parts of your notebook or
the entire notebook.
And you can decide whether to export
that into a little I-frame which again,
you can just copy and
chuck in a web page or
wherever you want,
even in another notebook, it turns out.
Or you can download some, like basically
a little snippet of JavaScript so
that you can throw it in whatever
vanilla environment you want.
And this is going to include the reactive
runtime that makes things like
the connection between those different
cells, between the input cells and
the chart work.
So that includes the Observable
runtime which is open source, and
that is going to give you all those code
that you need to kind of get that up and
running in a different
JavaScript environment.
And similarly there is
also some snippets and
instructions for pulling it into React.
So again this is to embed cells
from Observable into other places.
So this assumes that you are starting
from an Observable notebook.
And if we look at, for example, another
notebook like now I've just switched back
to our third project here,
the API responses one.
Unlike my previous one where I didn't
have any named cells, you'll see that you
have the choice of any named cells
that you have in your notebook.
And whether those are interactive with
view of, or not, with like status codes.
You can check just the ones
that you're interested in and
then it will generate the corresponding
snippets of whatever format you like.
The other cool thing is that you
can actually copy just the URL.
And then that gives you
essentially a standalone link
that goes straight to that iframe
with the cells that you've selected.
So this is a really handy dandy way.
You don't even have to deploy anything.
It's already up on Observable so
you can just send people to this embed
link directly if you want them to see your
cool interactive charts to make
them jealous of your data skills.
So those are some options for working
with Observable to share your work and
there are links in there to documentation
of those different features.
All righty, but, there are probably gonna
be times where you are not interested in
using Observable.
Maybe you didn't wanna sign up for
an account, totally legit.
Or maybe you don't want to have the added
overhead of including the Observable
runtime in your project.
So it is entirely possible to just
use Plot as a standalone library.
There are instructions in the Plot,
GitHub repo about how to
install Plot in your project.
Essentially, if you're using something in
JavaScript land that is
packaged up by a bundler,
you're gonna be able to
install observablehq/plot
as a dependency of your project with yarn,
with NPM, what have you.
You can also import Plot as a ES module.
So what I've got here is
a little code sandbox which you
can check out and mess with on your own.
But essentially what I've done is I've
included in the project dependencies,
I've done the equivalent of doing
yarn install, Observable HDQ Plot or
NPM, install, Observable HQ Plot.
So we've got observablehq/plot
as a project dependency,
and then I am able to import this capital
P plot with all of our mark functions and
the dot plot method and
all of that stuff, all of the things that
we were using in the Observable
environment are right there in Plot.
And if you notice it's all declarative,
right?
It's all just method calls
with options passed in.
So the syntax is gonna be exactly the
same, you can copy paste it from what we
were doing in Observable
into some other environment.
The only tricky part is you have to make
sure that you can access the data that
before Observable was helping us
access as those file attachments.
So in this case, for example, if I have
included my JSON file in my project,
I can just import it or maybe I'm
fetching data directly from the API or
from a database or what have you.
Again that's kind of out of scope here but
once I've got that data in I
can basically use the exact
same calls to Plot marks,
so, Cell plots etc.
In this case we were looking at
our project one results here,
all of the same stuff,
the color, domain and range,
all of that is exactly the same
literally copy pasted.
The only thing we have to think about is
that basically this call to plot dot plot.
What that returns is the nodes,
the sort of tree,
the mini sub tree of, in this case,
SVG nodes that are generated.
So Plot is built on top of D3 and
kind of makes the SVG elements that you
need to get your pretty visualization.
So, what this is doing is essentially
returning a DOM node which then we can
append to our document wherever we want.
So, in this case in my HTML I have
a little plot container element that
have assigned to be the kind of
little bucks that Plot can draw into.
And I'm just appending
whatever Plot outputs from my
calls to the library as
the child of that container.
So that is one way that you can
get your Plot into whatever
document you are putting
together on the Web.
All righty, and so that is in the Vanilla
environment where we're framework free.
But if you are using a framework like for
example React,
you can totally still use plot.
However, for example React, right?
It is called React because
it is making the reactivity
happen with its own way
of touching the DOM.
And so generally, when you're using
a framework like React, you don't want to
be touching the DOM yourself or letting
other libraries touch the DOM for you.
But in the case of Plot,
that's exactly what we want Plot to do.
We want it to draw those nodes
that we just saw, right?
Okay, so what we need to do
in React specifically and
just throwing this in there as a note for
y'all React developers out there,
is essentially escape the React World
with the use ref Hook.
So what this is gonna do is allow us
to kind of hook into a particular
DOM node that we've set up that
is essentially going to be
a little safe little place that
Plot can draw its chart into.
And so what we can do is use a ref
Hook to create that node and
connect it to whatever plots output
is within the call to a use effect.
So that we actually let Plot draw its
chart as a side effect within our app.
And then for any interactivity like for
example, our checkboxes, we're gonna have
to recreate that in kind of whatever
the paradigm of our framework is.
In this case, we're gonna
recreate it as a React component,
which then we can capture
in the application state.
And watch for any changes to the state
of those checkboxes to update
the element that we've told Plot to draw
into with a new call using the new values.
So in this case which checkboxes
are clicked for example?
So I don't get the convenience
of Observables built in
reactivity because I'm in a different
reactive paradigm, but it's all possible.
So this is again another sandbox that
shows just a little example of it,
really quickly we can take
a look at how this is working.
So essentially again, I've installed
a Plot as a dependency of the project,
same deal, I've got my data coming through
in a file, in this case it's the log data.
And then what I've done here is I've
created a little checkboxes component
that does the same work as our input
start checkbox was doing before.
And then these are the three hooks that
I'm gonna rely on my trusty friends use
refuse effect and use state.
So what I've got is I have
a component I'm calling it my Plot,
you can be more creative and
better at naming things than me where
I'll pass in the data that I care about.
And I can use that to, if I wanna swap out
the datasets or do something else with it,
I can do that as well.
I'm gonna have here I have a similar
thing to like all the status codes that I
had before.
I'm setting up a use ref to kind of
designate an element that Plot is
going to care about and talk to.
And then I'm using use State to
track the state of which of these
checkboxes are selected.
And so then what I have is a little
handler function that sets the state when
somebody changes the checkboxes, and the
magic happens within a call to use Effect.
Where I pass in the values that Plot cares
about, in this case, it's the data and
any of those interactive values that
we're using to filter down the data.
So in this case, our selected codes,
similar to what we had before
in observables, reactivity.
And then again, I'm just doing exactly the
same thing that I was doing before just
swapping out a few variable names.
So the syntax for Plot is all the same, so
what I'm doing is I'm calling Plot and I'm
getting those nodes out as, I'm capturing
it as this thing I'll call dot plot.
And then I am appending that to
the current contents of this node
that I've set up with use ref.
So ref is then the return node
from this call to use ref.
And all I have to do is remember
that each time I redraw this chart,
if I'm appending to this current node
within the ref that I have set up,
I'm gonna keep getting more and
more charts.
So I have to just remember to remove
the old ones if I'm redrawing the chart,
when let's say the selected codes changes.
So here I'm just returning
a little JSX snippet with
my with a DIV that is set up hooked
in to that use ref Hook, hook took.
So this is just a pattern for
using Plot reactively in
a framework like React.
You can hopefully use this to figure
out how you would wanna connect it to
other frameworks if you're using those.
And again, you can totally use it just
in Vanilla JavaScript as well, but
this is all just to convey
that It is all possible.
You don't have to use Observable
notebooks specifically.
If you do, you get the advantage of things
like the checkbox, reactivity, etc, all
baked in, with all those different inputs
that we saw in the Snippets as well.
But if you want to use Plot on its
own as just a JavaScript library,
it is totally doable.
And here are a couple of patterns that
you can use as a starting point for that.
There's more info in
the Plot documentation, so
you can check out
the observablehq/plot GitHub repo
to see more options and
examples and things like that.
There are also some examples around of,
again,
Plot embedded in React and
things like that, and
once again you have links to how
to do it with Observable too.
So that is how to get your plots
out of the staging ground and
into the wide wide world
of the Web out there.
If anybody has questions or runs into
problems using Plot in other environments
than Observable, that is what the open
source repo is there for as well.
So after going through this workshop,
you can also jump in there to see if
folks have raised other issues or
if you would like to
request new examples or
additional documentation,
things like that.
You can hop on to the GitHub repo.